---
layout: post
title: "Kailas Ashram Brahmavidya Peeth"
date: "2017-02-08 00:30:00 -0700"
category:
  - vedanta
---

The Kailas Ashram is a traditional advaita institution that teaches
the fundamental works of advaita vedanta in a traditional way, and has
a record of scholarship.

* [[link]](http://shankaramatha.org)
  Main website of the matha / ashrama, including many publications
* [[link]](http://dakshinamurtimathaprakashan.org)
  Website containing various books published by the publishing wing of the matha
* [[link]](https://swamimaheshanandalectures.wordpress.com)
  Website containing various lectures by Swami Maheshananda
* [[link]](https://archive.org/details/@bhrugu_mishra)
  Various complete teachings by Swami Maheshananda and Swami Shantidharmananda

Here is a [post](http://www.indiadivine.org/content/topic/1053185-information-on-kailas-ashram-brahmavidya-peetham/) about the Ashram, cached below. <!--more--> 

<hr>

Dear Friends,

Om Namo Narayanaya,

It is our great privilege that Shri Kailas Ashram Brahmavidya Peeth,
Rishikesh, has started its official website before some days. The link is
www.kailasashram.com .

Kailas Ashram Brahmavidya Peeth is a 115 years old Peetham, where ONLY
Sannyasins (and Naishthika Brahmacharins of course, who are just going to
enter the Sannyasa Ashrama) were allowed to study Brahmavidya according to
Sampradaya Parampara (Guru-shishya tradition), though recently from the last
15 years Grihasthas are also being allowed to participate, if they wish.
Bhagavan Shankaracharya says, "Even a scholar, who has studied all the
scriptures, but has not studied them under Sampradaya Parampara, should be
ignored as an ignorant" (Gita Bhashya 13-2). Kailas Ashram Brahmavidya Peeth
is the ONLY place in India where a person can study Prasthana Traya (Gita,
Upanishads and BrahmaSutra, with Shankara's commentary, Ananda Giri's
sub-commentary and Swami Vishnudevananda's Annotations) under Guru-shishya
Parampara. Today over 110 Sannyasins from allover India study there. All of
them are provided with lodging and fooding facilities. Even today, though
everybody is allowed to participate, the Ashram only keeps Sannyasins.
Girhasthas are just allowed to stay for 3 days or for some who are highly
interested 1 month.

Kailas Ashram has also a publication department, which is publishing one of
the best books in the field of Shankara Vedanta.

Great Saints, like Swami Vivekananda, Swami Abhedananda, Swami Ramatirtha
and Swami Shivananda have studied in Kailas Ashram. Even today saints like
Swami Dayananda (from ArshaVidyaGurukulam), Swami Vishvadevananda, Swami
Chidananda and Swami Krishnananda (Divine Life Society) have a great
adoration towards this Ashram.

Today Kailas Ashram is being directed by H.H. Swami Vidyananda Giri Ji
Maharaj, who is the 10th Peethacharya in the linage of Scholars. At present
His Holiness is 84 years old. He is considered to be one of the greatest
leading scholars in the field of Shankara Advaita Vedanta in India today. He
has also designed three courses, each one of 18 days, to learn Gita,
Brahmasutra and Upanishads. He has also been highly admired by all
present-day political leaders, Like P.M. Atal Bihari Vahpayee, H.M. Lal
Krishna Advani, Shri Murli Manohar Joshi, and VishvaHinduParishad. He is a
leading member of VHP, though he is totally untouched from the present day
politics.

Even today in the age of 84, he teaches Prasthanatraya, each one for one
hour, that makes 3 hours + he does one hour Patha (Parayana, recitation) of
Shankara's Bhashya on Gita.

Kailas Ashram has a very nice temple of Bhagavan Shankaracharya, with all
his four disciples.

I have seen Swami Krishnananda Ji, who is at present a great scholar from
the Divine Life Society, prostrating before him, when he comes to attend a
function in Shivananda Ashram.

I had the greatest fortune of my life to study from him for the last 12
years seince the age of 8. I invite all of you to visit the website and be
involved in the holy work of spreading Advaita Vedanta.

Loving Regards,

Siddhartha
